hello this is chef john from food wishes
calm with make-ahead mascarpone mashed
potatoes not only is this a delicious
alternative to regular traditional
mashed potato recipes but thanks to the
casserole delivery system it's a very
user friendly way to serve your potato
side dish alright we're going to start
by peeling about four pounds I have
about four and a quarter pounds actually
of russet potato
I really suggest you use the russet I
know a lot of people like mashed red
potatoes but for me they're just too
waxy the russet has the better texture
for maximum butter absorption all right
once they're peeled we're going to cut
them in half I like to go lengthwise an
old French chef taught me that a long
time ago you take your time you make
sure the knife is perfectly centered and
you cut it down the middle that way and
of course a key to this technique would
be making sure you buy those extra large
russet that are all basically the same
size because we're going to cook these
all the way through until completely
tender we don't want small pieces
falling apart and the bigger pieces
stayin crunchy that would be bad we're
going to boil those in salted water
until like I said very very tender it's
actually better to go a little tiny bit
over then under undercooked potatoes
we'll make those horrible lumps that
everybody hates so just make sure
they're totally tender so while those
are cooking I'm going to go ahead and
prep the rest of my ingredients which
are a lot of butter that's right two
sticks of unsalted butter see how nice
and yellow that is that's really good
butter and I know that seems like a lot
but I have over four pounds of potatoes
some restaurants use 25% butter by
weight of potato so this is about half
that all right it's a holiday meal I
want a little decadence it's okay this
is going to make like twelve servings
alright so I'm going to cut the butter
up in pieces just leave that out at room
temperature and then for the rest I have
our mascarpone cheese
not a ton maybe about a half a cup one
egg yolk and just regular milk so I'm
going to mix that together now if I was
smart I would have left my cheese out of
room temperature because this was really
hard to mix but I'm nothing if not
persistent so after a couple minutes
whisking it did mix in there nicely so
you may want to just leave your
mascarpone out on the table to come to
room temperature so that's all combined
and beautifully nice and frothy and then
the last bit of prep here I have my
seasonings salt black pepper and yes
Cayenne so by then my potatoes were
totally tender I tested them with a
knife which went in quite easily all
right they hadn't really fallen apart
yet but they were definitely definitely
very tender drain those extremely well
let them sit there for like five minutes
draining then I transferred into a large
bowl I'm going to toss in my butter I'm
going to toss in my salt and pepper and
I'm gonna mash those with a regular wire
potato masher if you want to put these
to a ricer or a food mill or something
go for it I don't think it's necessary I
don't mind a few pieces of potato
remember these are totally cooked and
tender all right not all lumps are
created equally undercooked potato lumps
are evil a crime against nature but
cooked potato pieces are okay those are
going to just collapse when we serve
this so no worries there once that's
mashed I'm going to pour in my milk
mascarpone mixture and as soon as that's
all whip together I'm going to transfer
this into my 9 by 13 standard casserole
dish and then I'm going to smooth it out
and I'm going to use the tip of the
spatula to make little nooks and
crannies and peaks and valleys and those
are going to get nice and browned when
we cook this and it's going to make it
look awesome
and rustic and delicious all right so
that part is the make-ahead you can do
that any time during the day you're
going to serve it you could even do it
the night before if you had to all right
but that's going to take a little longer
in the oven so I just made mine the same
days I'm going to serve it it can sit
right on the countertop until you're
ready all right and when you are ready
to bake simply pop it in a hot oven 425
for about 20 minutes or until it's
heated through and golden brown if you
want to cheat and put the broiler on the
top for a minute go for it
all right at you or make add mascarpone
mashed potatoes so anyway there you go
golden brown buttery delicious I should
have waited for this to cool but I
couldn't
it was just so inviting look at that
buttery crust look at those beautiful
light mascarpone scented mashed potatoes
inside just really really decadent not
too rich just rich enough so yes it is
basically a mashed potato but it almost
has that aspect of like a potato pancake
it's a little more satisfying it's just
a nice little twist on the classic
perfect for any special occasion so I
hope you give that a try all the
ingredients are on food whooshes calm of
course and as always enjoy